# Using Babel-Macros without Babel

**Latest attempt is at **./macro-acorn-walk**

This started as an attempt to port babel-macros to esbuild, but after a few
different attempts I'm now using Acorn to parse a bundle into an AST and doing
tricky find-and-replace using the location indices. It's a single AST pass and
there's no serializaton - only slicing of the original JS code string.

The idea is to use esbuild to bundle everything and transpile JSX/TS but leave
macros as "external". Then replace the macros in the bundle using Acorn. Lastly
I'll have to patch the source map using magicstring (see notes.md).

## Theory of macros and how they intersect with esbuild

There's no AST API for esbuild, so trying to replace the macro code is either
via reparsing the AST (i.e Babel) or doing using regexes. **Most macros will
need access to a full AST API and are better off using Babel than esbuild**. For
my case, I wanted to port _styletakeout.macro_[1] which extracts CSS-in-JS, and
I figured this wasn't complex enough to require AST operations. Is it possible
to take out CSS via `` css`...` `` tag template extraction?

There are plugins for esbuild, but to support macros means an `fs.readFile` on
every single file to see if it has an import... That's not great. How expensive
is an AST parse? How efficient can replacing macros be without getting in
esbuild's way (interrupting parallelism by using plugins etc).

## Does natively including macro support in esbuild make sense?

If a general purpose algorithm for doing extraction and replacement of macros
could be realized as a proof-of-concept (in JS via regex) then it could marketed
to esbuild as a feature request - ideally to leverage their AST to do extraction
properly (not regex) and in parallel in Go, then making one (1) call to Node to
have all "snippets" evaluated and dropped into the final bundle. That way,
unlike plugins which have to make one Node/Go call per file, a macro would make
only one (1) call.

Originally I wrote _./macro-esbuild-plugin_ as an attempt to work as an esbuild
plugin that extracts the macros per-file on import. It was to see if I could
replace macros "generally" via regex. It looked for function calls, tag
templates, and dot-notation of objects (see regex).

It worked for my case, in _macros/styletakeout.macro/example.ts_, but I got hung
up on the usecases beyond CSS-in-JS (notice how this repo references a handful
of macros that I was trying to convince myself with...).

I'm not sure if there's a sufficient usecase to warrant a PoC/PR into esbuild
itself. It's _more_ complicated than the existing plugin architecture.

## Is there a general case for extracting macros?

Macros have so many applications, right? Well. Macro authors can go wild with
the AST operations, and that kind of API will never be part of esbuild. Is there
enough demand for macros without an AST API available? Having `` tag`...`  ``
would at least support css, preval, ms, sql, gql, etc but all of that is before
you consider `${...}` interpolation and *nesting* oof...

Imagine `` stripIndent`...`  `` macro with ``${() => stripIndent`...`}`` inside
of it. That's... not improbable; in JS that's fine. In macros... How do you even
pass a reference *without* the AST? No way. Then do you pass strings of code
(?!) and their (overlapping) source indices? Do a topological sort on the order
of processing the macros? Devs will also want the filename information, per
file. It's messy :(

Even without considering nesting there's the issue of "when does a macro end?".
Such as `` tag`...`(1,2,3) `` - Does the macro dev want the (1,2,3)? Or do we
pass it since it's all "part-of-the-same-expression"? In ASTExplorer you'll find
that it's not really possible to say "this is the whole expression". Then people
writing macros will ask (for their extracted code) _"am I in a JSX expression? a
string? a function?"_. There's a real macro for Lavarel-interop that imports a
database model `import { Articles } ...` and does chaining with it:
`Articles.where('...').first()`. There's zero chance of supporting that without
an AST. In Babel that's fine, walk the entire AST, but in esbuild *at most* it
will be passing a substring of code...

There's no "general purpose" macro extraction with regexes alone, but there's
room between blind regexing and full AST manipulation/serialization - I can use
an AST to provide location indices (starts/ends of JS syntax) to not be so blind
in regex replacements, then find-and-replace sections of the JS code string
without involving the AST.

## Regex-only macros

It's not good to try and support all macros this way, but, there are some simple
macros which might be able to work well with regexes alone.

Isn't it too easy to trip up any kind of regex-based extraction method? Yes and
that's what parsers are for, but specifically for the case of tag templates with
very basic interpolation support that disallows nesting, it works.

If I have to do regex-only work then doing it on the bundle from esbuild is much
easier than doing per-file preprocessing which would need to support flexible
code styles (aka linting) and detect broken JS. Working after esbuild also means
the code is already validated and normalized. Yes, the macro code string might
still be broken, but that's per-macro: i.e CSS-in-JS macro would use Stylis' to
parse CSS. Lastly, there's also only one (1) import for the macro (its marked as
external in esbuild). (Edit: Sorry that's not true
https://github.com/evanw/esbuild/issues/475)

I want it to not be fragile though, so supporting nesting and complex
interpolation is a must. I can do that with an AST and `eval()`...

### Regex-only CSS-in-JS

For CSS tag templates, aside from nesting `${...}`, I think the only case of "`"
is escaped \` in `` css`content: 'abc\`ohno\`xyz';`. ``. Thankfully there's a
regex to handle that. Hmm `` css`...${`...`}...`. `` will break too. (TODO?)

### Regex-only failed/partial extraction detection using `eval()`

You can't just count "{" and "}" characters, and I don't want to write a parser,
but y'know who has a fast parser? JS runtimes. If you `eval()` it in Node with a
defined `` css`...` `` function that throws for broken code (including `${}`)
that's perfect. Ideally it throws _before_ passing to Stylis, because I don't
want Stylis to try and parse a broken template expression that leaks JS - I
don't know Stylis enough to know how it'd throw and in the worst case it would
carry on silently and lead to a debugging nightmare.

I've never used `eval()` before. ðŸ¤ž

### Regexes

- `` /css`((?:[^`\\]|\\.)*)`/ `` should handle escaped \`.
- `` /([^\w.])/css`...`/ `` will force "css" to start like `\b` does, but also
  with "." to prevent objects like `` some.thing.css`...` ``.

Notice that these are _incredibly_ macro-specific...

For esbuild minification, imports will change to something short like "t". Which
is questionable to search for. JS scopes might cause esbuild to reuse the
variable name in a place that doesn't conflict, so there could, in the smallest
edge case, be the use of `` t`...` `` somewhere that does _and_ doesn't refer to
the macro. I wanted to use `define` to make this even less likely, but no luck.

1. Carry on as normal and pretend it's not an issue
2. Use a default import since esbuild doesn't minify propeties on those and the
   autocomplete/highlighting in VSCode works for `` styled.xyz`...` `` so I'd be
   regexing `` t.css`...` `` or `` t.injectGlobal`...` `` which is maybe safer?
3. Does injecting eval() might prevent the imports from being minified?

Actually #3 is ruled out from esbuild docs - kills minification on the whole
file and is very bad.

I don't want to do #2 prematurely so I'll assume esbuild doesn't reuse
identifiers and try #1.

Update (months later): It seems esbuild _never_ reuses variables which is very
nice. I'll have to ask Evan if this can be relied upon. It lets me do a single
AST pass in Acorn instead of needing to do one sweep just to get identifiers and
determine who shadows who.

## AST+Regex macros

This is the current attempt, and is in _./macro-acorn-walk_. I'll likely publish
it similar to "acorn-globals" which is a generic string-in-string-out npm
package for detecting global variables from a JS code string. This is
independent of any other tools/bundlers.
